Tonight on "Secrets Declassified."
the rogue missions
that broke all the rules.
like the black op
to kidnap a Nazi war criminal
in broad daylight.
He's one of the most
wanted men in the world.
and they have just one chance
to bring him in.
Winston Churchill recruits a
boatload of modern-day pirates.
There's fighting dirty. and then there's
fighting like Churchill.
And the wartime spy
who goes undercover
in one of the deadliest places in history.
Who's mad enough to actually
break into Auschwitz?
These are the most extreme
and illicit missions
ever carried out by governments
and the people
who work for them.
It's time to bring them to light.
In 1960. a group of men
arrive at Buenos Aires airport.
They look like ordinary
businessmen on a sales trip.
In fact. they're intelligence operatives
on a high-stakes operation:
to kidnap a factory worker
called Ricardo Klement.
Real name? Adolf Eichmann.
It's been 15 years
since the end of World War II.
and Adolf Eichmann is one of the most
notorious Nazi war criminals
still evading justice.
Eichmann. more so
than almost anyone else.
is the logistical architect
of the Holocaust.
turning genocide into
an industrial operation.
He escaped justice after the war.
He's still on the loose
somewhere. probably alive.
but nobody could find out where.
Then. in 1959. Israeli intelligence gets
a credible tip that Eichmann
is living a quiet life
in a suburb of Buenos Aires.
The lead comes from a German refugee
living in Argentina.
Now. this guy's daughter
has been dating a guy
who keeps bragging that
his dad used to have
a really powerful position
in Nazi Germany.
And the dad's name is Ricardo Klement.
But the son goes by
the name Eichmann.
The Israeli government
gets word of the fact
that this person is
possibly Adolf Eichmann.
If there's anyone left who can be
brought to justice for
the crimes of the Holocaust.
this is the man.
There's one big obstacle
Argentina.
Israel and Argentina don't have
a working extradition agreement.
and Argentina has
a fascist-friendly government.
So if Klement is Eichmann.
there's no way
the Argentinian government
is just gonna hand him over.
To get their man.
Mossad decides to go rogue.
A top secret group of Mossad agents
is sent to Argentina.
Their mission is to seek out
Klement and confirm that
he is the same person as Eichmann.
And if he is. to kidnap him
and bring him to Israel.
You're not allowed
to do that kind of thing.
That is a blatant disregard
for the sovereignty
of another country.
First. the Mossad team stalks their prey.
They position agents
all along Klement's daily route
to his job at a Mercedes-Benz plant.
and they snap photographs
using cameras
cleverly hidden inside briefcases.
Their plan is to compare the pictures
they take in Argentina against
wartime photos of Eichmann.
Getting an image of Klement is easy.
The hard part is finding
a picture of Eichmann.
Toward the close of the war.
Eichmann deliberately destroyed
every photograph he had of himself.
Mossad have some grainy photographs
from the pre-war period.
but what they are lacking
is a photograph that
will provide a good view
of his facial features.
This is a problem
Mossad manages to solve.
After the war. one agent
seduced Eichmann's previous girlfriend.
And in her personal albums.
they were able to find
a picture of Eichmann from the war.
To tell if these snaps
taken over 20 years apart
are the same man.
the Mossad team hones in on
the one feature
the ear.
The curves and ridges of the human ear
are as distinct as a
fingerprint. so Mossad overlays
the two photos and runs a painstaking
ten-point comparison.
And they discover that the
two men have an exact match.
Ricardo Klement is Adolf Eichmann.
Now. Mossad needs to capture him.
On the evening of May 11th.
as Eichmann steps off
his usual bus home.
a man approaches him casually
and says. "Momentito. señor."
Eichmann turns. and in that instant.
he's tackled and dragged
into a waiting car.
He is taken to a safe house
on the outskirts of town.
There. he is interrogated.
and he ultimately
admits that he is Eichmann.
Capturing Adolf Eichmann is one thing.
Sneaking him out of the country
without the Argentinian
authorities realizing.
that's quite another.
To do that. the Mossad team
crafts a daring escape plan.
In ten days. a large official
Israeli delegation is scheduled
to be in Buenos Aires.
The agents' plan is to dress Eichmann
in an airline crew uniform.
blend him into that crowd.
slip him past security.
and fly home to Israel.
Before arriving at the
airport. a doctor on the team
heavily sedates Eichmann.
They take him through the airport
as part of their delegation. claiming that
he's sick to everyone who's around.
When the Israeli team gets to customs.
they have a fake passport.
That document was made
just a couple days ago.
and they've done their best
to dirty it and crease it
so it looks like a well-worn passport.
but they don't know if it's going to work.
It's almost as if the Border Patrol officer
can sense that something isn't right.
But ultimately. he clears
the group to get on the plane.
At 12:05 on May 21st.
the plane takes off carrying Eichmann.
Two days later. Israeli Prime
Minister David Ben-Gurion
makes a stunning announcement.
Adolf Eichmann is in Israel.
Argentina is beyond upset.
They lodge a protest
at the United Nations.
accusing Israel of violating
its national sovereignty
and demand Eichmann's return.
Israel refuses.
claiming private Nazi hunters
carried out the operation.
A year later. Eichmann
finally faces justice.
Eichmann is put on trial.
Survivors of the Holocaust
describe in detail
the machines of murder
that Eichmann helped construct.
He's found guilty
of crimes against humanity.
Then. on May 31. 1962.
Eichmann is executed by hanging.
Only after 50 years does Israel finally
drop the pretense
that Mossad had nothing
to do with his capture.
In 2012. the full truth is revealed
when Mossad opens its archives
in an exhibition on Eichmann.
They display the briefcase camera.
the forged Israeli passport.
and even the ear comparison
that confirmed his identity.
Two decades after
Mossad sneak Eichmann out
of Argentina. the CIA begins
its own smuggling operation
to secretly funnel
an eye-watering $2 billion
into the hands of anti-Soviet fighters.
What follows is the most expensive
and most consequential illicit
operation in U.S. history.
In December 1979. the Soviet
Union launches a massive attack
on Afghanistan to prop up
the Communist government
by sending close to 100.000 troops.
The Soviets seize the cities quickly.
but out in the remote rural expanses.
it's a whole different story.
There. a coalition of Islamist fighters
called the Mujahideen hold
their ground guerilla style.
The CIA spots an opportunity.
If they can drag out this fight.
they could drain the power and
resources of the Soviet Army.
So they kick start Operation Cyclone
to support the Mujahideen.
The problem is.
finding any guerrilla force
fighting the Soviet Army
risks igniting World War III.
and these are some highly
controversial new allies.
The Mujahideen is funded
by the narcotics trade
and are religious fundamentalists
who hold very anti-Western views.
Funding fundamentalist narco barons?
Kind of a tough sell on Capitol Hill.
To help win Congress's approval
for this rogue operation.
the CIA teams up
with an unlikely ally.
The CIA turns to Texas
Congressman Charlie Wilson.
He's this heavy drinking womanizer.
but he's also politically savvy.
Wilson's influence manages
to massively inflate
the CIA's budget for Operation Cyclone.
With Wilson's help. the
budget for Operation Cyclone
balloons from $5 million to
more than $30 million by 1983.
But to defeat a superpower.
the Mujahideen
needs more than just money.
They need something the CIA
can't send them: Firepower.
If the CIA flooded
American weapons into Afghanistan.
that would be an open provocation
against the Soviets.
Also. the Mujahideen
don't know how to use
American weaponry.
They are trained on Soviet weapons.
Somehow the Americans have to get
their hands on a cache
of Soviet weapons
that can't be traced back to them.
In 1983. this challenge is handed
to a renegade CIA agent.
a man named Gust Avrakotos.
also known as "Dr. Dirty."
Avrakotos is a blunt.
foul-mouthed agency fixer.
known for bending the rules.
He knows that Egypt
has recently switched
its alignment from the USSR to the U.S.
Avrakotos feels there could
be a massive supply
of Soviet weapons in Egypt.
So he flies to Cairo.
where he gets the red carpet treatment
thanks to Congressman Charlie Wilson.
The Egyptians have
already been softened up
by a visit from Wilson.
who allegedly brought
his own personal belly dancer to perform
for the defense minister.
Whatever it is she did during that dance.
it seems to have worked.
The defense minister gives
Avrakotos a personal VIP tour
of all the Egyptian defense installations
that house the Soviet matériel.
Amongst this hoard of weaponry.
Gust spots a weapon that
could truly tip the scales...
54 Katyusha rocket launchers.
The Katyusha is a 122-millimeter rocket
that would give the Mujahideen
long-range firepower
for the very first time.
Now. it's not accurate enough
to take out helicopters.
but it can hit the Soviet bases
that they fly from.
Avrakotos buys everything
the Egyptians have.
His next challenge is to get
these weapons over 2.000 miles
from Egypt to Afghanistan.
Believe it or not. the best way to get
a rocket launcher
to Afghanistan undetected
is to strap it to a camel.
Gust engineers a massive
covert supply chain.
First. ships carry the arms from Egypt
through the Suez Canal into Pakistan.
And then the weapons complete
the journey over the border
into Afghanistan on
traditional camel caravans.
At its height. some 300.000 guerrillas
wield CIA-sourced weapons.
By the late 1980s. the CIA
is channeling over $600 million
annually into Afghanistan.
This flood of cash
and arms turns the tide.
The Soviet Union officially withdraws
on February 15. 1989.
The drain on the Soviets was immense.
Billions were spent.
15.000 Soviet soldiers died.
and scholars say this was
one of the pressure points
that eventually led to the collapse
of the Soviet Union.
The full story of Operation Cyclone
remains a secret until 2003.
when one journalist
named George Crile pieces
together the whole mission.
George Crile is a Middle East reporter
who spends 15 years
investigating Operation Cyclone.
He interviews everyone involved.
including Avrakotos and Charlie Wilson.
And in 2003. he publishes the book.
"Charlie Wilson's War."
revealing the whole
tangled truth for the first time.
These revelations expose that many
of the Mujahideen the U.S. fight in 2001
are the same as those
they armed 22 years earlier.
When 11 of its athletes are murdered
at the Munich Olympics. Israel
hunts the perpetrators down.
not through the courts
but in the shadows.
with an extreme vengeance mission
that breaks all international laws.
The 1972 Summer
Olympics in Munich. Germany.
becomes a horror show.
A Palestinian group
called Black September
storms the Olympic Village
and takes 11 Israeli
athletes and coaches hostage.
It ends in a bloody shootout
on an airfield.
and all the hostages are killed.
For Israel's security services. Mossad.
it's a massive intelligence failure
because it was their job
to prevent something
like this from ever happening.
Israel's prime minister. Golda Meir.
publicly vows revenge.
and she wants it by any means.
Israel doesn't have
extradition relationships
with the countries that are definitely
going to be harboring the
perpetrators of this crime.
The traditional path of justice will
get her absolutely nowhere.
So she orders the chief
of Mossad to plan a series
of extrajudicial revenge hits.
For Israel. this isn't just about justice.
"If you kill Israelis.
you won't walk away."
The rogue mission's codename?
Operation Wrath of God.
Mossad draw up a kill list
of the key terrorists.
But these men are scattered
all across the globe.
often living under aliases.
To hunt them. Mossad needs the most
up-to-date and reliable intel
on their movements.
To help. Israel has a backdoor channel
to a vast European intelligence network.
At the time. there's this
semi-secret coalition
of Western European spy agencies
called the Club de Berne.
Its purpose is to share information
on terrorist threats across the continent.
Israel has access to its telegram system.
which supplies live data on passports.
hotel registries. and surveillance.
Using the intelligence flowing
from the Club de Berne.
Mossad tracks down
every target on their list.
They build a series
of compact mobile kill teams
from their most elite commando unit.
Now these teams
head out across Europe
to eliminate those
behind the Munich attack
and strike the fear of God
into any other terrorist
who might threaten Israel.
The first target is Wael Zwaiter.
the PLO's representative in Rome.
believed to be a key facilitator
for the Munich massacre.
As he returns to his apartment building.
two figures step out of the shadows.
They gun him down.
They shoot him 11 times.
one bullet for each victim
of the Munich massacre.
The message is sent.
Next. Mahmoud al-Hamshari.
Killed when his phone
explodes in his hand.
Then Mohamed Boudia.
killed by a car bomb.
By the summer of 1973. 11 are dead.
After each hit. the Mossad
uses the Club de Berne intel
to monitor the aftermath.
They read the reports
from European agencies.
and this allows them
to stay one step ahead.
Then. in July 1973. the agents believe
they've located their biggest target of all.
Ali Hassan Salameh
is the alleged mastermind
of the Munich massacre.
They get a tip that he is in the town
of Lillehammer. Norway.
and start preparing an operation.
The Lillehammer hit
is a particular challenge.
Mossad has no established network
in Norway. no safe houses.
Add to that. the intel is thin.
It's all based on a single
grainy photograph of a man
that they think is Salameh.
Mossad has a team on location.
and one night.
they spot a man at a bus stop
who looks like the target.
They follow him and then gun him down.
It turns out this man is not Salameh.
It's a Moroccan waiter
by the name of Ahmed Bouchiki.
It's a catastrophic error.
And it's about to get
worse for the Mossad.
Their escape plan falls apart.
The team have used credit
cards in their own names.
so police trace them easily.
Norwegian authorities quickly
round up the Mossad agents
and convict five of them in court.
The fallout is a public relations disaster.
Israel's kill list is exposed to the world.
forcing them to halt
their entire operation.
But behind the scenes.
Mossad's secret access
to the Club de Berne remains.
leaving the door open
for Israel to finish the job.
Six years later. Israel reactivates.
Operation Wrath of God for one last hit.
Fresh intelligence locates
Ali Hassan Salameh.
He's in Beirut.
And this time. they're certain it's him.
On January 22nd. Salameh
drives down a bustling street.
A car bomb in a parked Volkswagen
kills Salameh and eight other people.
Salameh's death
brings Wrath of God to a close.
For decades.
Europe's intelligence services
are not suspected
to have any connection
to this illicit killing spree.
That changes in 2018.
Swiss historian Aviva Guttmann
is looking into the matter
of this Club de Berne
anti-terrorist network. and she wants
to see the telegram system.
Archivists give her access to a host
of sensitive intelligence files.
They probably didn't realize
what they were sharing.
because in these files is definitive proof
that Europe was sharing
intelligence with Israel
and supporting one of the most terrifying
state-sponsored
assassination operations.
In 2025. Guttmann
reveals the truth to the world
in a bombshell book.
They say cheaters never prosper.
But in World War II. Winston Churchill
green lights a mission that
breaks all the rules of war.
To shatter the Nazis' power at sea.
he sends a secret unit of saboteurs
to raid a neutral island.
In 1941. Britain feels like it's losing
the Battle of the Atlantic.
Nazi U-boats are decimating the convoys
that are carrying food. fuel. and troops
vital for the Allied war effort.
By the end of 1941.
almost 400 Allied and neutral
merchant vessels have been sent
to the bottom of the Atlantic.
Then. British receive intelligence reports
from Fernando Po. a tiny island
off the Coast of Africa
that reveal a critical
chance to fight back.
British intelligence
discovers that the Germans
are gonna use Fernando Po
as a sort of off-the-books
refueling site where they can
refuel and restock
their U-boats and get them
back into the fight quickly.
They believe three vessels
in Fernando Po's harbor are crucial
to the German resupply operation.
The ships consist of
an Italian merchant ship
and two German tugboats.
Taking out these three boats
could cripple the Nazi
supply chain in the Atlantic.
But there's a problem.
Fernando Po belongs to Spain.
Spain is officially neutral.
but its fascist leader. General Franco.
is very friendly with Hitler.
So the British know that if
they launch a military strike
in Spanish territory. that would be
a breach of international law
and would almost certainly
draw Spain into the war
on the side of the Nazis.
And that would be a disaster for Britain.
So to take out these ships.
Winston Churchill green lights
a more underhanded strike.
Churchill decides that. to beat the Nazis.
Britain has to fight dirty.
So he forms a new top secret team.
essentially one of the world's
first special forces.
the Small Scale Raiding Force.
the SSRF.
At the time. Churchill calls them.
His Ministry of Ungentlemanly Warfare.
Their first mission?
A secret raid to steal the three Axis ships
lying in Fernando Po's harbor.
codenamed Operation Postmaster.
The SSRF devises a plan
that. when you look at it.
it's just piracy. plain and simple.
A raiding team of around
30 mercenaries that are mostly
recruited from nearby Nigeria
will sneak into the harbor.
hijack the ships. and tow them
out to international waters
where the Royal Navy
can "stumble" across them
and legally seize them.
To prepare for the raid.
a handful of SSRF agents
quietly slip onto the island.
But they realize
that they're going to need
some aerial photography of the harbor
where the boats are anchored.
Well. it turns out that
the territorial governor
has an airplane.
So they set up the circumstances
whereby they are able to photograph
the governor in a bathtub
with his mistress.
Using those photographs.
they then bribe him
into taking them up for a flight
around the harbor. during which
they take the needed photographs.
Next. the agents discover that.
during the attack. the SSRF's raiders
will be vastly outnumbered.
So to even the odds. they throw a party.
The German and Italian
officers love shore leave.
So using local connections. the
team organize this lavish bash
on the night of the raid.
Music. drinks. just the works.
It's the perfect misdirection.
except the only restaurant
they can book has
a perfect view of the harbor
and all the target ships.
But they solved the problem
with the clever seating plan.
The agents ensure every Axis officer
is sat with his back to the sea.
and with a beautiful
woman opposite of him
to hold his attention.
Never before in the history
of the Second World War
has a seating chart been
a strategic piece of
masterwork. but here it has.
Decoy in place.
on January 14th. the mission begins.
Any mistakes could bring Spain crashing
into the war on Hitler's side.
So the team is on their own.
London has made it crystal clear.
if any of the raiding party are caught.
they'll be disavowed and left
to face the consequences alone.
As the distraction
party gets into full swing.
an operative on the island kills the lights.
Two blacked out tugboats
enter Fernando Po's harbor.
carrying the 34 raiders.
In darkness. the raiders maneuver
alongside their three targets.
Now they announce their
presence to the whole island.
The team blow the anchor chains
off the three enemy ships.
In the chaos. the commandos
board the enemy ships.
taking the crews captive at gunpoint.
Axis officers race from the party
and arrive just in time
to see their ships disappear
into international waters.
And a few days later. they're picked up
or. rather. intercepted
by a British warship.
Churchill's high
stakes gamble has paid off.
London rolls out pre-written headlines.
"Navy patrols on routine duty seized
the three ships legally."
The Spanish are furious
over the incursion.
but there's no proof that Britain
has broken international law.
With this mission.
Churchill is sending a powerful message.
He is acknowledging that the
Germans are bending the rules.
and he's also telling them.
I'm gonna bend the rules too.
Two can play at that game.
For over 40 years.
the British maintain the cover story.
Only when Spain's fascist government
is removed from power
does British intelligence
begin to declassify the truth.
The astonishing story
of Operation Postmaster
is finally revealed.
All rogue missions ignore the rules.
Our next story also ignores the risk.
To uncover the horrors
of a new Nazi prison camp.
one spy walks inside willingly.
then escapes it
to tell the world what he saw.
That camp is Auschwitz.
It's 1940.
Poland has been occupied by Nazi
and Soviet forces for about a year
when whispers begin circulating
about a new prison camp being built
in the south near the town of Oswiecim.
Oswiecim will ultimately become known
as the concentration camp
and then eventually
the extermination center
of Auschwitz-Birkenau.
Auschwitz is synonymous with evil.
It's the epicenter of the Holocaust.
where over a million people
were systematically murdered.
But back in mid-1940.
the name of this camp and
its true purpose is a mystery.
All the Polish people know
is that the Germans have taken
over some old army barracks
and converted them
into a detention facility.
But when the first prisoners arrive there.
alarming reports start to leak out.
There are tales of murder. torture.
and horrific experiments.
The Polish resistance decides
it needs urgent answers
about what's going on
behind the barbed wire.
So one 39-year-old officer
named Witold Pilecki
volunteers for an incredible mission.
Witold Pilecki is a former army lieutenant
who hates the Nazis and will stop
at nothing to sabotage them.
He literally volunteers to
go undercover as a prisoner
to the Nazi prisoner camp.
Once there. he means
to collect intelligence.
build a resistance network
to smuggle in food
and medicine for the inmates.
His plan is so extreme
not everyone is on board.
Some of Pilecki's leaders
don't know how bad things are
inside this concentration camp.
but they're worried that
it's basically a suicide run.
The plan is so far
outside normal procedures
that it's incredible the Polish resistance
doesn't simply shut it down.
In late summer. Pilecki is finally
granted permission
to head into Auschwitz.
But he can't just walk up
and knock on the door.
He needs to be transported
there as a genuine prisoner.
To make sure his military
record doesn't draw
the attention of the Gestapo.
he takes on a false identity.
Tomasz Serafinski.
Then. he deliberately gets himself
rounded up by the German military police
in the streets of Warsaw.
Those arrested could be
taken anywhere in the Reich.
And his plan is to
essentially just hope that
he gets sent to Auschwitz.
Three days later.
Pilecki's gamble pays off.
He enters the camp underneath
the now infamous sign
that reads "arbeit macht frei."
"work will set you free."
Witold Pilecki is the only
known person to have ever
entered Auschwitz by choice.
Now he's prisoner 4859.
In the camp. Pilecki
endures backbreaking labor.
conditions so harsh that
a prisoner's life expectancy
is measured in weeks. not months.
He keeps his head down. but
he begins to build a network.
Pilecki recruits other
prisoners inside the camp.
and they start organizing a group
to distribute food and clothing.
And they even undertake
small acts of sabotage.
Against all odds. Pilecki's
daring mission is paying off.
But in March 1942. everything changes
when Auschwitz transforms
from a brutal work camp
into an extermination machine.
In the spring of 1942. Nazi leaders begin
to enact their Final Solution.
This is a genocidal
blueprint for wiping out
all of Europe's Jews.
Pilecki is witness to the opening stages
of the Holocaust.
He sees trains arriving.
coming and going.
He sees Jewish men. women. and
children being dropped off.
And then he sees
billowing clouds of smoke.
indicating that
they have been incinerated.
Faced with this horror. Pilecki knows
the world must hear the truth.
It's a message so crucial
he must deliver it in person.
So two years and seven months
after breaking into Auschwitz.
Pilecki plots his escape.
Through his network.
Pilecki and two co-conspirators
slowly gather false papers.
civilian clothes. money.
and even cyanide. which they
will use on themselves
if they do get captured.
Pilecki bribes a guard to transfer him
to the camp bakery located just outside
the main perimeter. one of the
least secure areas of the camp.
The night of April 26. 1943.
they make their move.
At 2:00 a.m.. the three men
force open the bakery door
and sprint into the darkness.
The alarm sounds.
gunfire goes off behind them.
but somehow they vanish
into the woods.
Then they make a grueling
60-mile journey on foot
until they reach a resistance safe house.
Shortly after. Pilecki hand writes
his 104-page mission report.
It's a landmark document.
Pilecki writes the first eyewitness
account of the Holocaust.
It's the first time the Allies
really understand what's going on.
but they're helpless to do anything.
It's not until January of 1945
that the Soviet troops arrive
and finally liberate Auschwitz.
Pilecki survives
the war. but in the aftermath.
he faces a new. deadly challenge.
Two years after Germany's defeat.
Poland falls under Soviet control.
Now Pilecki has to fight for
his country all over again.
But this time. it doesn't go as well.
He's arrested by the
Communists for organizing
acts of resistance.
He's tried. convicted.
and then in 1948. he is executed.
After his death. the Soviets expunged.
Pilecki's bravery from Polish history.
His incredible mission
to reveal the horrors
of Auschwitz is buried...
until 2000. a decade after
the Soviet Union collapses.
when his eyewitness report
is finally published.
In 2006. Poland
posthumously honors Pilecki
with the Order of the White
Eagle. their highest award.
Recognition of a spy
who broke all the rules
to walk into a hell on Earth
and tell the world what he saw.
In the last 150 years.
more than 60 national leaders
have been assassinated.
Those responsible are usually radicals.
rebels. or lone gunmen.
But behind this plot to kill
a democratically elected
prime minister is the CIA.
On June 30. 1960.
the African nation of the Congo.
now known as the DRC.
declares independence
after decades of colonial rule by Belgium.
The country's first ever prime
minister. Patrice Lumumba.
promises that from now on.
the Congolese people
will control their own land.
including its mineral wealth.
The Congolese are euphoric.
In Belgium. they're seething.
The Congo is massive.
It's about the size of Western Europe.
and it is absolutely packed with minerals.
There's copper. there's
cobalt. there's uranium...
all resources that Belgian
corporations have been mining
to fuel their industries for generations.
Belgium immediately moves to reclaim
control of this wealth.
It incites a mineral-rich southern region
known as Katanga to
break away from the Congo.
They select a local politician
to be a puppet leader
and send in Belgian troops
to support him.
To hold his country together.
Lumumba asks the U.S. for military aid.
When they refuse. he turns to the East.
Lumumba reaches out
to the Soviet Union.
and they give him weapons and advisors.
Now. for America. that crosses a line.
Washington now
sees Lumumba as a threat.
potentially spreading
Communism throughout
the African continent.
The CIA director. Allen Dulles.
demands his urgent removal.
They wanna take out the
democratically elected leader
of a sovereign nation. a flagrant violation
of international law.
The man who gets
the task is Larry Devlin.
CIA Station Chief at Congo's
capital. Léopoldville.
Devlin decides he's gonna
remove Lumumba from power
by orchestrating chaos.
He funds the opposition.
He bankrolls demonstrators.
And he spreads
anti-Lumumba propaganda.
Then he sets his sights on the military.
The CIA starts paying off colonels
in the army for their loyalty.
Soon. the country is in chaos.
And now they encourage a new
leader to take advantage.
Colonel Mobutu places
Lumumba under house arrest.
and the military seizes control
of all of the elements
of government power.
But for the CIA. that's not enough.
They need a more permanent solution.
As long as Lumumba is alive.
he remains a powerful symbol
with huge support among the people.
The CIA needs him gone.
But if Devlin is going to solve
the problem of Lumumba.
he needs to do it fast.
There has been an election
in the United States
and a concern that JFK could soon
call for Lumumba's release.
Devlin's bosses suggest poison.
But he thinks that might get
traced back to the agency.
Then he figures Lumumba has
many enemies besides the CIA.
so why not get one of them
to do the job for him?
Larry Devlin settles in on a plan.
and that is to deliver Lumumba
to his political enemies
in the province of Katanga.
and there. his execution
is pretty much guaranteed.
But Persuading
the Congo's many factions
to sign up to this plan isn't easy
without attracting attention.
Devlin needs to coordinate
with a lot of different groups
in the Republic of Congo.
but he's prominent enough
that he needs an excuse
for why he can move around the country.
Luckily for him.
the perfect smokescreen is
on its way. a living legend.
In October 1960. a plane touches down
at the Léopoldville airport.
And out steps none other
than Louis Armstrong.
Satchmo. arguably America's
first truly global superstar.
has come to play in the Congo
where his concerts draw
crowds of over 100.000 people.
For the CIA. the timing is perfect.
Devlin hosts Armstrong at
the U.S. embassy facilities
and can use the concert schedule
to jet around the country.
It's argued that. under the guise
of those tours logistics.
Devlin meets Lumumba's
enemies in Katanga
to plot his execution.
All the while. Armstrong has no idea
his tour is being hijacked
for a covert CIA operation.
By the time Armstrong flies out.
Patrice Lumumba senses
the noose is tightening.
He makes a desperate attempt
to escape but is caught.
On January 17. 1961.
Lumumba is recaptured
and flown into Katanga
under Colonel Mobutu's orders.
That night. Katangese officials
and Belgian operatives
drive him out into the bush
where he's executed on the spot.
Patrice Lumumba.
the first democratically
elected prime minister
of an independent Congo.
is dead at 35.
In his place. the CIA's
strongman. Colonel Mobutu.
rules the Congo for over three decades.
But piece by piece. the CIA's role
in this rogue assassination is uncovered.
The story first comes to light in 1975.
when Congress investigates
the CIA's illicit activities.
Then. in 2021. a British author
named Susan Williams stitches details
from newly declassified documents.
and she uncovers what she
believes are indications
of just how far
the CIA's manipulations went.
right to the CIA's use of
Louis Armstrong's Congo tour
as a smoke screen.
From the 1950s to the 1970s.
the Federal Bureau of Investigation
under the iron reign of J. Edgar Hoover
runs a top secret illegal operation
targeting thousands of U.S. citizens.
The only reason we know about it
is because eight ordinary Americans
pulled off one extraordinary heist.
By 1956. J. Edgar Hoover
has been running the FBI
for over three decades.
For him. the real threat
to America's security
isn't organized crime or bank robbers.
it's ideas. political movements
that threaten the system.
particularly Communism.
He wants to root out these
groups and neutralize them.
No holds barred.
Hoover's problem is.
the courts keep getting in his way.
Hoover is willing to use illegal wiretaps.
bugging. intercepting mail.
He believes that these tools
and tactics are fair game.
But the courts insist on warrants.
They want constitutional protections.
Hoover sees these as
operational inconveniences.
So in 1956. he
decides to circumvent the law
with a new classified
operation he calls COINTELPRO.
short for Counterintelligence Program.
Hoover creates a program
to try to monitor the behavior
of potential dissident groups.
He also starts having agents
infiltrate them and push
more radical activity than
they had previously espoused.
which will then justify the FBI
in suppressing those groups.
This is an illegal operation
targeting U.S. citizens on American soil.
and it grows fast.
By the 1960s. Hoover expands
the program's scope
to civil rights leaders and opponents
of the war in Vietnam.
Any voice speaking out
against the status quo.
Hoover calls it subversive
and unleashes his agents.
One activist is dead center
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
At this time. Martin Luther King
is the most prominent voice
in the Civil Rights movement.
His profile and influence make
him a key target for Hoover.
In 1962. Hoover instructs COINTELPRO
to investigate King for alleged
Communist influences.
He doesn't really believe
that King is a Communist.
He just wants to disrupt
the Civil Rights movement.
As Hoover digs into
Martin Luther King Jr..
he bugs his hotel room. taps his phones.
puts him under 24-hour surveillance.
all without warrants from the courts.
Eventually. they record evidence.
Not that King is a Communist.
but that he's been having an affair.
It's the ammunition Hoover needs
to bring King down.
Now COINTELPRO crosses
the biggest line yet.
In November of 1964.
King receives a package.
Inside are audio recordings documenting
his extramarital relationship.
There's also an anonymous
threatening letter.
He calls King a fraud and tells him.
"There is but one way out for you."
The FBI seems to be telling
a Nobel Peace Prize winner
to kill himself.
It's not subtle.
King refuses.
Hoover's unchecked operation
targets citizens across America
for over a decade.
But its secrecy is about to be shattered.
because in a quiet corner
of Pennsylvania.
eight ordinary Americans
are plotting to expose
the FBI's dirtiest tricks.
In 1971. a group emerges that calls itself
the Citizens' Commission
to Investigate the FBI.
and they are convinced that the FBI
is engaging in behavior that is illegal.
immoral. and unethical.
Their plan?
Break into an FBI office to
steal documents that prove it.
Their target is a lightly guarded
field office in Pennsylvania.
And they'll do it on
the perfect night for a heist.
On March 8. 1971.
Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier
are gearing up
for the fight of the century.
Millions of Americans.
including local police.
are gonna be glued to their televisions.
Dressed in suits and evening wear.
the team approaches the office as if
they're heading to a party. They break in.
And once inside. they ignore
files on mobsters
and bank robberies and instead
search for evidence
of political surveillance.
The group find hundreds
of classified pages.
They take all this information
and walk out into the night.
Back at a safe house.
they sift through over 1.000 pages.
and they come across the
critical name. "COINTELPRO."
The activists have
uncovered extensive details
of Hoover's illegal war.
The question now. is any journalist
brave enough to take on Hoover
and publish what they've found?
The burglars mail copies
of some of the most
incriminating documents to members
of the press and politicians.
Most of the recipients
of this classified material
are terrified at the prospect
of publishing it
because publishing classified
documents is a crime.
Only Betty Medsger. a journalist
for "The Washington Post."
has the courage
to publish the story.
And when it hits the press.
the country absolutely erupts.
Hoover defends his actions as needed
to keep Americans safe.
Privately. the exposé forces him
to pull the plug on his operation.
Determined to find the burglars.
he unleashes 200 agents.
one of the largest
manhunts in FBI history.
For 40 years.
the identities of the burglars
remain a total secret until Betty Medsger
publishes a book about their exploits.
It's only then that the world
finally learns who they were.
eight ordinary Americans
who risked everything
to expose the illegal plans
of their own government.
When the stakes are high
enough. no set of rules
will ever stop a government
from getting what it wants.
But the rogue missions
they carry out in the dark
eventually get exposed for all to see.